Rings
Ring doughnuts are formed by joining the ends of a long, skinny piece of
dough into a ring or by using a doughnut cutter, which simultaneously cuts
the outside and inside shape, leaving a doughnut-shaped piece of dough and a
doughnut hole from dough removed from the center. This smaller piece of
dough can be cooked or added back to the batch to make more doughnuts. A
disk-shaped doughnut can also be stretched and pinched into a torus until
the center breaks to form a hole. Alternatively, a doughnut depositor can be
used to place a circle of liquid dough (batter) directly into the fryer.

There are two types of ring doughnuts, those made from a yeast-based dough
for raised doughnuts or made from a special type of cake batter.
Yeast-raised doughnuts contain about 25% oil by weight, whereas cake
doughnuts' oil content is around 20%, but they have extra fat included in
the batter before frying. Cake doughnuts are fried for about 90 seconds at
approximately 190 째C to 198 째C, turning once. Yeast-raised doughnuts absorb
more oil because they take longer to fry, about 150 seconds, at 182 째C to
190 째C. Cake doughnuts typically weigh between 24 g and 28 g, whereas
yeast-raised doughnuts average 38 g and are generally larger when finished.

Holes

Doughnut holes are small spheres that are made from the dough taken from the
center of ring doughnuts or made to look as if they are. Doughnut sellers
saw the opportunity to market "holes" as a novelty, as if they were the
portions cut out to make the ring. Similar to standard doughnuts, doughnut
holes may be topped with confections, such as glaze or powdered sugar.

Traditionally, doughnut holes are made by frying the dough removed from the
center portion of the doughnut. Consequently, they are considerably smaller
than a standard doughnut and tend to be spherical. Originally, most
varieties of doughnut holes were derivatives of their ring doughnut
(yeast-based dough or cake batter) counterparts.

Commercially made doughnut holes are not made by cutting out the central
portion of a ring doughnut, but instead by dropping a small ball of dough
into hot oil from a specially shaped nozzle. This production method has
allowed doughnut sellers to produce bite-sized versions of non-ring
doughnuts, such as filled doughnuts, fritters and Dutchies, making the term
"doughnut hole" somewhat of a misnomer for these varieties.

Both doughnut holes and bite-sized doughnuts are almost exclusively referred
to by brand names of the offering chains, such as "Munchkins" from Dunkin'
Donuts and "Timbits" from Tim Hortons.

